Welcome to creating
a simple dashboard in Cognos Analytics.
After watching this video,
you'll be able to create
simple dashboards in Cognos Analytics,
use different methods for creating
visualizations in Cognos Analytics,
and configure interactive filters
within a Cognos Analytics dashboard.
In this demonstration, we'll create
a simple dashboard in Cognos Analytics.
Let's start by selecting the data set on
the My Content tab of the content section.
In the tool bar we choose to create
a dashboard and now
we're going to select the relevant dashboard template.
We'll choose this one which has
four small panels across
the top and a large panel at the bottom.
Then we click "Create" to get started on our dashboard.
Please note that as the data is
uploaded during the import process,
the usage property for each data item is set according to
the type of data that the query items
represent in the data source.
However, we can change this if required.
In the case of order number,
we'll change the usage property
from a measure to an identifier.
Now we can start to create some visualizations.
First, let's see how
to create visualizations automatically.
From the data source pane on the left,
you choose a data item on which you want to develop a
visual and then drag it onto the Canvas template.
In our case, we'll drag sales to the top left panel.
Notice that when dragging an item,
we need to ensure that
the square with the double-headed arrow has
turned blue in the destination
template panel before we drop it.
Next, we can determine the number of orders that we've
had by counting the number of order ID's we have.
In this case, Cognos Analytics has determined that
the best visualization style
for this identifier is a table.
However, we can see if there are
any other recommended visualizations.
In this case, there aren't
any suggestions other than table.
But we know we want to turn this into a summary,
so we can just manually select that from the list.
Next up, let's look at the quantity ordered,
which we'll place in the third panel
and we'll finish with determining the average sale.
To do this, we'll drag sales onto the canvas,
into the fourth small panel.
But then we'll change
our summarization from sum to average.
So just like that, we now have
a few key performance indicators or KPI's,
to be able to monitor and track.
The other way we can start to
create visualizations is to select
the specific visualization that we
want and then drag it onto our canvas.
In this case, we're interested in looking at
our sales across the world based on countries.
We'll drag country to
the locations field under regions in the right-hand pane.
As we said, we want to take
a look at sales across these countries,
so we drag sales to
the location color field on the right.
This will update our visualization
to show the sum of sales by color.
We can manually resize
our visualization to make it
as big or as small as we want.
And as we extend the object,
we can see labels that show us the percentages of
the canvas real estate that
the visualization will use up.
We'll make this map visualization use
approximately 50% of the template's width.
Each visualization we use has
several properties that we can configure,
including settings for the legend,
the chart, and the layers for regions,
points latitude and longitude.
The final way that we'll demonstrate how to create
visualizations in Cognos Analytics
is through the assistant.
We can see that the currently loaded dataset is
already mentioned in the assistant panel
on the right hand side,
we can either ask one of the example questions
by typing directly into the ask a question box.
Or we can click the suggest questions link
in the assistant text box below to get insights.
This will offer up some insights
that we may not have been thinking about.
In this case, we'll keep it simple and we'll
just ask which deal size has the most sales?
With a single click we're now presented with
the visualization as well as
alternatives based on that visualization,
such as a horizontal bar chart,
a scatter plot, and a bubble chart.
Once we've decided which visualization we like,
we simply drag it onto our canvas and it
now becomes a visualization alongside the others.
And we can resize it as we did for the other visualization.
Dashboards in Cognos Analytics
are designed and intended to be interactive.
If we just click one of
the bubbles in our deal size visualization,
we can see that all the data in
the other visualizations get updated accordingly,
specifically for the selected sector,
medium deal size in this case.
And if we click a different sector, such as large,
all the visualizations update
to reflect that sector instead.
Another way we can show
interactivity is by using filters.
Suppose we were interested in the status of our orders,
we could take a particular field,
in this case status and either drag it into
all tabs or into this tab
so it only affects this particular tab.
Now, with this we can choose one or multiple options.
However, in this case,
we only want to see how many orders we
have in the on-hold status.
As before, all of the other data visualizations have been
updated to reflect only the orders
that are in an on-hold status.
So it looks like from a worldwide perspective,
we only have holds in a couple
of countries which is positive news.
In the next video, we'll delve deeper into a few of
the more advanced capabilities of
dashboards in Cognos Analytics.
In this video, you learn that you can
select from several different dashboard template layouts.
You can change the usage properties of
data attributes in your data source pane.
You can generate dashboard visualizations by
dragging data fields onto your dashboard canvas.
You can also create visualizations by selecting
visualization styles from the menu
and dragging them onto the canvas.
You can use the assistant to offer
data insights and create visualizations.
And Dashboards in Cognos Analytics
are interactive by design and
provide filters and real-time updates
to enhance the dashboard experience.