In this video we will have a brief introduction to dashboards, including what they are,
what they consist of, why they can be a useful component in a data analyst’s toolkit,
and an essential skill in a data analyst’s skillset.
The term ‘dashboard’ comes from the automotive industry where car designers have put the most
important gauges and other display information, such as engine oil temperature, current speed,
current RPM, amount of fuel left, and so on, in a handy graphical display that is easy for
the driver to view and understand. Originally these displays were analog, but most are now
digital and use varying forms of visualization, including digital meters and mini graphs.
You can take that same idea and apply it to a dashboard in a data analysis application;
designers of these types of dashboard want to put key business information in one place,
in the form of graphical displays, to make it easier for the viewer to understand them.
Dashboards can take this a step further by also allowing the user to interact with the dashboard
and modify exactly what information they see by using tools supplied on the dashboard.
Users of a dashboard therefore not only get a consolidated visualization of their business
data and key performance indicators (or KPIs), but also get a controllable
self-service business intelligence (BI) interface
through the use of filters, which enable them to control precisely what information they see.
Dashboards are typically created in a data analysis application by using multiple pivot
tables and charts, visualizations such as Map Charts and Sparklines,
and filtering tools such as Slicers and Timelines. These pivot tables and
charts could be created from a single data source or from multiple data sources.
When you use dashboards in your data analysis application, you get the following benefits:
They offer insights into your key data
They can alert you to patterns and trends in your data
They provide an interactive experience for the user; allowing them to filter what data they see
They are updated dynamically as the source data changes
They provide a centralized and consolidated view of business data
A dashboard can be a very useful tool in areas of the business such as
fiscal forecasting and reporting, project management, executive reporting, human resources,
customer service, helpdesk issue tracking, healthcare monitoring, call center analytics,
social media marketing, and many more.
For a budding data analyst, dashboards can be a vital skill to add their arsenal, as the majority
of employers see the dashboarding skill as a ‘must have’ rather than a ‘nice to have’.
If you can show that you have the skills to create accomplished and spectacular,
interactive, yet easy to view and use dashboards, whether in a spreadsheet application such as
Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets or using a more advanced data analysis and visualization
application such as Bokeh or Dash in Python, RStudio’s Shiny, Tableau, or IBM Cognos Analytics,
then that will greatly help in your future career as a data analyst.
In this video, we had a brief introduction to dashboards, including what they are,
what they consist of, why they can be a useful component in a data analyst’s toolkit,
and an essential skill in a data analyst’s skillset.
In the next videos, we will learn how to create a simple dashboard using a spreadsheet application.