Welcome to navigating in Cognos Analytics.
After watching this video, you'll be able to,
navigate around the Cognos Analytics user interface.
Upload a CSV file as a dataset in Cognos Analytics.
And start a new dashboard in Cognos Analytics.
After you launch Cognos Analytics, the homepage will open.
Let's get familiar with what's on this homepage.
There are two main navigation areas for Cognos Analytics.
The first is the main menu in the top left corner.
And the second is the toolbar at the top right of the page.
From the homepage, we can also access video tutorials and
view getting started information.
And get a tour of the product.
From the toolbar at the top of the page,
we can check how many days are remaining in our trial.
And if we wanted to, we could click this countdown timer
to access the upgrade button to purchase a full product subscription.
The AI assistant tool is also accessible from this toolbar.
And we can ask questions of the assistant by typing them into the text
box in the center of the homepage.
We can start to create content either by uploading new data or
by creating content from existing data.
And lastly, once we begin working with content,
this recent section of the homepage will update with our recently used items.
If we click on the main navigation menu in the top left of the page,
we can use new to create new items such as data modules,
dashboards, reports, and stories.
We use upload data to upload our external data files, which we'll do shortly.
We use the contents section to create new content or
open different samples to work with.
The recent item in the menu shows any recently used files we've worked on.
So now let's upload a file to use as a dataset in Cognos Analytics.
We will upload a comma separated value or CSV file as our dataset in this case.
To upload the file we click Upload data from the main menu.
A new file browser window will open.
We then navigate to where the file is located, select the file, and click Open.
Notice that status bars will be visible at the top of the page as the upload
process reads and analyzes the loaded data.
We can view the progress by clicking the details link.
Once the upload has been completed, the status bar will update to show
the successful completion before automatically closing.
The uploaded content will be stored in the My content area.
Once in My content, we can open it,
move it to a shared area within Team content, or delete it.
In the content section team content shows any shared content, and
there are also several useful samples for us to try out and play with.
And if we scroll to the bottom of the page, we'll see a link to the IBM
accelerator catalog, which provides many more useful resources,
samples, guides, and custom visualizations.
We will also see our recently uploaded dataset in the recent section in the menu.
We can always use the assistant icon on the top right of the page to
find insights from our data once data is uploaded.
We'll come back to the assistant in a later video in this course.
The last thing we'll do is start creating a dashboard in Cognos Analytics.
We do this by selecting our dataset first and
then choose to create a dashboard from the menu.
The first thing we need to do when building a dashboard is to select
a template.
We can see many different template layouts here and
based on what we're trying to achieve, how many visualizations we want and
what types, we may want to select something specific for that purpose.
In this case, we'll choose one with four small panels and one large one below them.
Once we've selected which template we want,
we click Create to get started creating the dashboard.
Once we're in the dashboard,
we'll notice that the left pane displays the fields in our uploaded dataset,
which is known in the Cognos Analytics interface as the selected source.
There are a few other things that we will highlight here in terms
of navigation in Cognos Analytics when creating dashboards.
So the first menu icon that we've already selected is the sources icon, and
this is where you view and use the fields in the selected data source.
The second icon is the pins icon which displays all the different visualizations
you have pinned for reuse in other dashboards across the system.
Currently this list is empty as we haven't pinned any visualizations yet.
The next one down is the visualizations icon, and here the system tab displays
all the different visualizations that we can use in our dashboards.
On the custom tab, we can also upload our own custom visualizations if
we can't find one that meets our needs.
To add a visualization to the list of pinned items,
we simply select a visualization, in this case the decision tree,
which will add it to our blank canvas.
Then with the visualization selected in the canvas,
we click the pin icon in the top toolbar.
A popup message first shows the pinning progress and
then a confirmation that the item has been pinned.
If we look back at our pins we can see the newly pinned visualization.
Pinning visualizations means we can quickly find
the visualizations that we use most often or are most important to us.
The last icon we will look at is the widgets icon, which is where we can add
additional widgets to our dashboards and to our stories.
Widgets typically consist of either text, images and shapes,
video and audio media, or even embedded web pages.
So that was just the basics of starting to create a dashboard and
getting to know the dashboard interface.
In a later video, we'll dive a little bit deeper into how to work with
dashboards and how to add content to them.
In this video, you learned that you can create new content,
view existing content, upload data, and view recent files from the main menu.
Uploaded content is stored in the My content area.
The assistant can help answer your questions and
find insights from your data.
You can pin commonly used visualizations for later reuse.
And Cognos Analytics provides several different dashboarding templates.