In the first part of this video,
we will listen to several data professionals discuss how
dashboards can help when presenting data results.
Can you tell us how dashboards can
help you when presenting data results?
One thing I particularly love with data are dashboards.
They take the fluff out and they
show you the most important things that you want to see,
often in real time,
and you can make them as pretty as you want.
I've seen some dashboards that are frankly an eyesore
because of trying to cramp
so much data into one dashboard.
It's important to be specific and be succinct in
what it is that you're looking for so that
you can avoid those things.
A lot of the times the dashboards are great for
executives or business owners on the go who
are maybe looking at dashboards from
a mobile device and they don't really have
the space or the capacity
on a mobile device to look at so much data.
Dashboards can really be highly
effective in the short amount of time as long as you
understand the deliverables and
what it is that you're stakeholder wants to
see and what's important to
them for purposes of making decisions.
The reason why presenting
the information in a way that is palatable to
your audience is important is
because you want to make sure that
people are getting value out of what you're doing.
A lot of times I think that's why data analysts in
general get a bad reputation because
people still think we're just number crunchers.
I think the bigger problem is we haven't
done as good of a job as we could to
really explain the numbers and so that's
where PowerPoint presentations with graphs,
we love graphs, key performance indicators
maybe that break out
the information in a different way and
highlight what's most important, that will help.
And also just making sure that you're reading the room.
If you were in a meeting and
everybody's eyes are glazed
over because you're talking numbers,
maybe you need to ask them,
"What information are you looking for?
What is most important to you?"
So that when you go back and you create
your next dashboard or create your next report,
you can highlight things that are important to
your audience because we
always need to be reading the room.
We need to make sure that we are showing our value,
helping people to understand,
educating them so that they can bring up
their knowledge-base and so that
starts to help the fear dissipate.
The fear of the numbers starts to go away if
we would just show them what the numbers actually mean.
And we can do that not just by
throwing numbers at them so they'll get overwhelmed,
but by helping them to see it
graphically and with dashboards and KPIs,
and other ways just to bring it
to them and make it real to them.
Dashboards in a spreadsheet is an indicator for action.
Just like on your car dashboard,
if you see a low fuel light,
that means you need to put gas in your car.
So a dashboard in a spreadsheet should be just that simple.
It should tell the person what they need
to focus on immediately or
any indication that things need to change because
it's either going up in the wrong direction
or it's going down.
But don't put information
that's nice to know on a dashboard.
It's on a need to know basis
especially if you want to get action.
In the second part of this video,
we will listen to a data professional
discuss how Cognos Analytics can help
you create outstanding visualization dashboards
for presenting data results.
Can you tell us how you use Cognos Analytics to
create visualization dashboards
for presenting data results?
IBM Cognos Analytics can really help you create
a better visualization and
dashboards in a number of different ways.
Starting off we have our templates,
allowing you to quickly select from
a template and simply drag and drop
your visualizations into the slides
to help you create something that's
visually compelling effectively and easily.
We also have what we call our visualization recommender.
If you grab a couple fields,
drag them onto the canvas,
we'll recommend a visualization.
If you don't like the one we recommend right off the bat,
then you do have the ability to go in and start to select
some different visualizations from our recommendations.
On top of this, we also have started to
infuse AI into the offering.
So in this, you can start to have
the system actually generate an entire dashboard for you.
You can have a conversation with our assistant,
ask it questions,
and once you're focused in on
the particular area that you're interested in,
simply say, "Generate dashboard."
At that point you'll get a beautiful dashboard created,
laid out nicely that you can
search and use as your starting point for
further discussions and help you really
understand the data that's in your system.
A couple of things that we want to highlight,
one is the advanced analytic capabilities.
Whether this is through our visualizations like
our key driver analysis
or through our AI infused forecasting.
The last thing would be the ability to share
your visualizations and your dashboards
in just a few clicks.
Whether that's sharing it in the system through a link,
whether it's pushing it to email or even pushing
it into a Slack channel where you
can start to have a discussion there.