Welcome to Creating an IBM Cloud Account and a Watson X Service.
After watching this video, you will be able to
Create an IBM Cloud Account,
Create an IBM Watson X Service,
and Create a Project in Watson X.
To create an IBM Cloud Account,
go to the IBM Cloud Registration page,
enter your email and password,
and then click Next.
Verify your email using the 7-digit code
sent to the email address you entered,
then click Next.
Once your email is successfully verified,
enter your First Name, Last Name,
and Country or Region,
then click Next.
Review the Account Notice.
Opt-in for the email updates if you desire,
and accept the terms and conditions,
then click Continue.
Review the Privacy Notice and accept it.
Click Continue to create the account.
It will take a few seconds to create and set up your account.
In the Apply Code section,
you will see that the feature code has been applied to your account.
Click the Create Account button to continue.
It may take a few minutes to create your account.
Once your IBM Cloud account is created,
you will see the IBM Cloud Dashboard.
To use the Watson Studio Service,
click the Catalog option.
Scroll down and select AI-slash-Machine Learning,
then select Watson Studio.
This will load the Watson Studio creation page.
Select Dallas or London under the Location option.
To avoid any charges, select the Lite plan,
then accept the license agreements,
and click the Create button.
Then, click Launch in IBM Watson X.
Provide a company name and phone number,
and select the contact options you prefer,
then click Continue.
On the next screen, click I Agree to the Terms.
Click Close icon.
You have successfully created an account for IBM Watson Studio
and are ready to use the Watson X service.
IBM Watson X homepage appears as follows.
Now, let's start creating a project.
Click Create a new project.
Provide the project name and description.
The cloud object storage has already been added.
Click Create to create a project.
It will take a few seconds to create a project.
Once created, the project will look like this.
The next video will show you how to add a notebook to the project.
So, without further delay, let's begin exploring Watson X.
In this video, you learned that
you must create an IBM Cloud account to use Watson X.
You can open Watson Studio by clicking Catalog on the IBM Cloud Dashboard,
and then AI slash Machine Learning.
You can create an empty project or a project from a sample or file
by clicking the Create a new project option.