Welcome to Jupyter Notebooks in WatsonX, Part 1.
After watching this video, you will be able to
Create a Jupyter Notebook and load a data file
Share a Jupyter Notebook with others
and
Create a job and schedule it to run
In the previous video, you learned how to create a project.
Once created, you will see this page.
Click Assets and click New Asset
to add or create a new notebook.
Under Work with Models, select
Work with Data and Models in Python or R Notebooks
to create a new notebook.
Now you can create a sample notebook,
upload a notebook file from your local file system,
or upload a notebook file from a URL.
In this video, you will create a blank notebook.
First, provide a notebook name and description,
then click Create to create a notebook.
It is best practice to include a description
of the notebook's purpose and functionality before executing.
Now, change the cell type to Markdown,
so this cell will not be treated as code.
In the Markdown cell,
describe what the notebook does and run it.
After you create a notebook, you will upload the data.
Ensure the data you load and the code commands
you use to analyze that data
match the kernel-slash-runtime language you selected
when you created your notebook.
Click Data Asset icon to upload the data.
Click Drop Data File Here or Browse for files to upload.
In the Data pane,
browse for the files or drag them onto the pane.
You must stay on the page until the upload is complete.
You have the option to cancel an ongoing upload process if need be.
Once the dataset is loaded, it is displayed as Uploaded.
After uploading the data,
click the Code icon and then click Read Data.
Click Select Data from Project.
Click Data Assets.
Then select the uploaded data and click Select.
Now, the data is available to work on.
Select Pandas Data Frame.
Click Insert Code to sell.
Now, a new cell will be added
and the corresponding code will be automatically inserted into it.
The inserted code loads the dataset into a data frame.
Run the code cell to display the first five rows of the dataset.
From the File tab,
select the Save Notebook Version option
to save the latest changes in the notebook.
Click the project name to return to the project homepage.
Back on the project homepage,
under the Assets tab,
select the notebooks in the left navigation pane.
You'll find the notebook on which you have recently worked.
Click to open it.
The notebook will open in a read-only mode.
To edit, click the pencil icon in the notebook action bar.
When the View Notebook Info icon is selected,
under the General tab,
you can change the name and description of your notebook
and also see the last editor,
last modified date,
and the creation date.
On the Environment tab,
you can see the environment template used to open the notebook.
Change the template, view the environment details,
and check the runtime status.
You can create a URL to share the notebook on social media
or with people outside of Watson Studio.
The URL shows a read-only view of the notebook.
Anyone who has the URL can view or download the notebook.
Click the Share icon in the notebook action bar
to see sharing options in a pop-up window.
If you want to share a read-only version of the notebook
in the dialog box,
enable the option Share with Anyone Who Has a Link.
You can select how much of the content you'd like to share.
You can select Only Text and Output,
All Content Excluding Sensitive Code Cells,
or All Content Including Code in the sharing options.
You can then share the notebook either through a link
or on social media.
Then click Close.
The Jobs feature provides an efficient way to run,
schedule, and monitor jobs in a Watson X project.
Click the Create a Job icon from the notebook action bar
and click Create a Job.
On the Define Details page,
enter the job name and description and then click Next.
In the Configure page,
check all the required details and then click Next.
On the Schedule page,
you can select any one run after job creation
or run on a schedule as required.
Then click Next.
If you require a notification for this job,
enable the Notification option and then click Next.
Review the job details and click Create.
After the job is successfully created,
a pop-up window will appear with the message
The job was successfully created.
Click the project name to return to the project homepage.
Go to the Jobs tab to view the job you created.
You can edit and delete the job from here.
In this video, you learned that.
You can add or create a new notebook
by clicking New Asset on the project homepage
under the Assets tab.
You can share your notebook without sharing the sensitive cells.
Jobs are created and scheduled
from the Create a Job icon in the notebook action bar.
And jobs can be viewed, edited or deleted
on the project homepage under the Jobs tab.