[MUSIC]
Welcome to "Sharing Enterprise Data: Data Asset Exchange." After watching this video,
you will be able to navigate around IBM's open data repository,
the Data Asset Exchange, explore open data sets on the Data Asset Exchange,
and identify the notebook associated with a data set in Watson Studio.
Now there are many open data sets available to the public, but
it can be difficult to find datasets that are both high-quality and
have clearly defined license and usage terms.
To help solve this challenge, IBM created the data asset exchange or DAX.
DAX provides a curated collection of open data sets both from IBM research and
trusted third-party sources.
These data sets are ready for use in enterprise applications with a wide
variety of application types, including images, video, text, and audio.
DAX aims to foster data sharing and collaboration by keeping data sets
available under a community data license agreement or CDLA.
DAX makes it easier for developers to get started with data sets because it
provides a single place to access unique,
high-quality data sets from trusted sources like IBM research.
It also provides tutorial notebooks that walk through the basics of data cleaning,
pre-processing and exploratory analysis.
Certain data sets include advanced notebooks that explain how to perform more
complex tasks like creating charts, training machine learning models,
integrating deep learning via the model asset exchange, and
running statistical analysis and time-series analysis.
The Data Asset Exchange and
the Model Asset Exchange are both available on the IBM Developer Website.
With these resources, developers can create end-to-end analytic and
machine learning workflows and consume open data and
models with confidence under clearly defined license terms.
In the Data Asset Exchange, multiple open data sets are available for
you to explore.
Let's say you found a data set that might be very interesting to you,
the NOAA weather data, JFK airport database,
which contains data from a weather station at the John F.
Kennedy Airport in New York.
On this data set page, you can click "get this data set" to download the NOAA
data set from the cloud storage, run data set notebooks to access
the notebooks associated with the data set in Watson and preview the data and
notebooks to explore DAX metadata, glossary and the notebook.
Now, most data sets on DAX are complemented by one or more notebooks.
Click "assets" to view all the Jupyter notebooks and data available.
You can click the source code to view all the notebooks associated with your NOAA
project.
You can execute all the notebooks in Watson Studio to perform data cleaning,
pre-processing and exploratory analysis.
If you are already familiar with opening the notebooks in Watson Studio,
you can log into your IBM cloud account, create a project and
load all the notebooks into the project.
Data sets on DAX also consist of one or more data files.
Click the data option to view the data files available in your project.
In this video, you learned that the IBM Data Asset Exchange or
DAX site contains high quality open data sets.
DAX open data sets include tutorial notebooks that provide basic and
advanced walkthroughs for developers.
DAX and MAX are available on the IBM Developer Website.
You can get, run, and preview data sets and notebooks on DAX and
DAX notebooks are opened in Watson Studio.
[MUSIC]