Dependencies or libraries are
pre written code to help solve problems.
In this video, we will introduce pandas,
a popular library for data analysis.
You can import the library or
dependency like pandas using the following command.
Start with the import command
followed by the name of the library.
You now have access to a large number of
pre-built classes and functions.
This assumes the library is installed.
In our lab environment,
all the necessary libraries are installed.
Let us say we would like to load a CSV file
using pandas build in function, read_csv.
A CSV is a typical file type used to store data.
Simply type the word pandas,
then a dot and the name of
the function with all the inputs.
Typing pandas all the time make it difficult,
so you can use the As
statement to shorten the name of the library.
In this case, use the standard abbreviation pd.
Now type pd, next,
type a dot followed by the name
of the function you would like to use.
In this case, read_csv.
You are not limited to the abbreviation pd.
In this case, we use the term banana.
However, we will stick with
pd for the rest of this video.
Let us examine this code in more detail.
One way pandas allows you to
work with data is in a dataframe.
Let us review the process of going from
a CSV file to a dataframe.
This variable stores the path of the CSV.
It is used as an argument to the read_csv function.
The result is stored to the variable df.
This is short for dataframe.
Now that you have the data in
a dataframe, you can work with it.
You can use the method head to examine
the first five rows of a dataframe.
The process for loading an Excel file is similar.
Use the path of the Excel file, the function read_excel.
The result is a dataframe.
A dataframe is comprised of rows and columns.
You can create a dataframe out of a dictionary.
The keys correspond to the column labels.
The values are lists corresponding to the rows.
You can then cast the dictionary to
a dataframe using the function DataFrame.
Notice the direct correspondence between the table.
The keys correspond to the table headers.
The values are lists corresponding to the rows.
Create a new dataframe consisting of one column.
Enclose the dataframe name,
in this case df,
and the name of the column header in double brackets.
The result is a new dataframe
comprised of the original column.
You can do the same thing for multiple columns.
Enclose the dataframe name,
in this case df,
and the name of multiple column headers
in double brackets.
The result is a new dataframe
comprised of the specified columns.
One way to access
unique elements is with the iloc method.
The first input is an integer representing the row index,
and the second is the integer
representing the column index.
You can access the first row and first column as follows.
You can access the second
row and first column as follows.
You can access the first row,
third column as follows
and you can access the second row,
third column as follows.
You can use the name of
the row index and the column as well.
You can access the first row of the column
named artist as follows.
Similarly, you can access
the second row of the column named artist.
You can do the same for the column released.
Loc can also be used if the index is not an integer.
We create a new dataframe called df_new.
We replace the index 1, 2,
3 and so on with a, b,
c. You can access the index a,
that is the first row of the column
named artist as follows.
Similarly, you can access
the index b or the second row of the column named artist.
You can do the same for the column released.
You can also slice dataframes and
assign the values to a new dataframe.
Assign the first two rows and
the first three columns to the variable z.
The result is a dataframe
comprised of the selected rows and columns.
You can also slice dataframes and assign
the values to a new dataframe using loc.
The code assigns the first three rows and
all columns in between
the columns named artist and released.
The result is a new dataframe,
z, with the corresponding values.
Check out the labs for more examples.