Welcome to Jupyter Notebooks in WatsonX Part 2.
After watching this video, you will be able to
Check the Jupyter Notebook Rundime Environment
Use different types of Jupyter Notebook templates
And change the kernel within a Jupyter Notebook
You have learned how to create a Jupyter Notebook.
Now you will manage the environment.
Go to the Data Science Project homepage.
Click the Manage tab, and then click Environments in the left pane.
If your notebook is executing, you will be able to see the active runtime environment.
Note that you can execute your notebook to see the active runtime if it is not visible.
To see the available runtime environments, click Templates.
In the Template Name list, you can explore available runtime environment templates.
Select any template as your active runtime environment.
Let's select the RS Studio environment.
On selecting the template, you will see the summary of the template.
To create a new template, go back to the Template page and click New Template.
Enter the environment name, its description and configuration.
Then click Create to create the environment.
The newly created environment will appear at the top.
A summary and software configuration details of the new template will be displayed.
To change the current runtime to the newly created template runtime, click the Assets
tab, and then select the new notebook you created.
If you see the lock icon, unlock it and select the notebook again.
Next, select the three dots on the right and click Change Environment.
Select the new template environment you created and click Change.
In the pop-up, select the kernel from the drop-down option and click Select Kernel.
In the top right corner, you will see the new runtime.
Now you can drag and drop any CSV file to upload.
Click Insert Code to Sell to include the code into the notebook.
To execute the notebook, click Run.
You will see that the output is now using the new runtime environment.
In this video, you learned that
Jupyter Notebook runtime environments and templates can be found on the Environments
tab on the homepage.
You can create and change new Jupyter Notebook templates.