Welcome to advanced capabilities
in Cognos Analytics dashboards.
After watching this video,
you'll be able to create calculations in
Cognos Analytics dashboards use
navigation paths to drill down deeper into your data,
exclude data points from visualizations,
and set top and bottom filters on visualizations.
To get started using these advanced capabilities,
we need to select a dataset and create a dashboard.
Then we select an appropriate dashboard template.
Here we'll choose the 2 by 2 dashboard template.
We need to change the usage property for
the order number attribute from
a measure to an identifier.
In the data source pane on
the left under navigation paths,
right-click the data file and select calculation.
Cognos dashboards can create
calculations like in applications such as Excel.
When you create a calculation you need to give it a name.
In this case, we'll call it margin.
Calculations comprise several components,
filters, data, and functions.
If we open the functions list,
we can see they are categorized into different sections,
such as operators, summaries,
constants and types of functions.
We can start typing a formula to create
a calculation and
Cognos Analytics will offer suggestions,
or we can drag and drop
the required attributes for the calculation.
In this case, we are interested
in calculating our margin by
calculating our MSRP minus
the price we sell each unit for.
So we can either drag and drop the attributes
directly from the left pane or we can start
typing the attributes name and Cognos Analytics
will find it for us and then we
select it from the suggestion list.
Then we can build our calculation using either method,
including any required operators,
in this case, the minus sign.
Now that we've created this calculation,
it's added to the list of
data attributes in the data source pane
on the left and treated the same
as any other fields we have here.
We can drop margin and
product line onto our dashboard canvas.
Let's expand this panel to see the data more clearly.
In this case, we see that trains is not doing well.
In fact, it's actually a negative margin for us.
Now we may want to drill
into this issue a little bit more.
We can create what's called a navigation path.
We can choose any field from
our data to drill up and down on.
In this case, we want to
start with product line and we'll
probably want to see customers
and if there are specific orders.
We now have a new navigation path
in the data source pane.
We can right-click on trains and start to drill down.
In this case, we can see
a few offenders with
a negative margin when we look at this field,
like the Mini Gifts company.
So let's drill down a little further.
Here, we can see that while they
have one order that has a positive margin,
the other three orders margins are in the negative.
Before we look at the exclude feature,
we need to drill back up as we are
currently drilled down on trains.
Let's collapse the view in
this panel to see all the dashboard panels again.
Now we'll drag sales status
and product line onto our dashboard canvas.
Notice that we are still filtered on trains only.
We can click trains again to turn off
that filter and show all our product line items.
Let's expand this second panel to
see the data more clearly again.
Here we can see that our shipped status
is dramatically impacting this visualization.
To better view all our other statuses,
we can exclude the shipped items from this visualization.
Now we have a better view of what is
happening with those other statuses.
Let's collapse the view in this panel
to see all the dashboard panels again.
Now we'll illustrate another advanced feature
called top or bottom filters
which might be used in situations where we want
to focus only on the most crucial data points.
Particularly in cases where we have a large dataset.
We'll drag the sales and customer name
attributes to a blank quadrant
in our canvas to show this.
Let's expand this panel to see the data more clearly.
To use the top or bottom filter feature,
we right click on the sales
attribute and choose top or bottom.
This lets us choose the X number
of top or bottom values in our data,
with the default setting being 10.
As a result, we can quickly identify and
analyze the top 10 customers
based on their sales figures.
The visualization has been updated to
show us our top 10 customers.
One last thing we'd like to show you is that we can use
Cognos Analytics to instantly generate infographics.
So let's collapse the view in this panel
again to see all the dashboard panels.
As an example, if we're working with the sales data,
we can open the widgets menu,
choose an appropriate shape,
such as a piggy bank,
and then drop it on the sales
visualization in the canvas.
With this simple action,
we can transform our data into an engaging infographic,
making our data visualization informative and memorable.
In this video, you learned that you can create
calculations in Cognos Analytics dashboards.
You can drill down into your data and create
navigation paths for detailed data exploration.
You can exclude certain data points from
your visualizations to focus on other areas of interest.
You can set top or bottom filters
for advanced data analysis
and you can generate
instant infographics to enhance your data visualizations.