Welcome to Cognos Analytics introduction and how to sign up.
After watching this video,
you'll be able to describe what IBM Cognos Analytics is and
explain the signup process for a trial version of IBM Cognos Analytics.
Let's have a quick overview of Cognos Analytics.
Cognos Analytics is a multifaceted business intelligence and
analytics platform developed by IBM.
It offers a wide range of tools and features, such as data modeling
capabilities, data exploration, advanced analytics features, such as filters.
And excludes the use of natural language generated from your data with the help
of an artificial intelligence-based assistant,
the ability to create interactive dashboards and
custom reports that are specific and tailored to your individual users.
The main focus of this course will be to use these tools and
features to create fantastic dashboards.
Now to sign up for the trial,
we're going to go to the Cognos Analytics trial page.
In a web browser, we'll navigate to ibm.com/products/cognos-analytics,
then we click Start free for 30 days.
If we already had an account, we could use this link to log in here and
provide our existing credentials.
As we don't already have an account, we'll go ahead and
fill out this form with the required information, including our email address,
which will become our IBM ID, first name, last name and a password.
Then we enter other information such as our country and state or province.
Then we enter a phone number, specify whether we are a student or not, choose
an industry sector, and then select a data center that is close to us geographically.
Finally, we click Next,
which will initiate the sending of a verification email.
So, we now need to go to our email app and
find the email message from IBM with the seven digit verification code.
We enter the seven digit code here and then click Start today.
We are then redirected to the Products dashboard.
And in the Products list we will see a panel for
the IBM Cognos Analytics on Cloud Trial.
This is where we can launch our trial version of the IBM Cognos Analytics
product.
Now we are all set to use IBM Cognos Analytics for
data visualization and to create impressive dashboards.
In this video, you learned that Cognos Analytics is a data
visualization platform with a range of tools and
features to create visuals, dashboards and reports on your data.
And you can get a 30-day free trial version of
IBM Cognos Analytics on the Cloud.