Now that we've learned how to create basic charts, in this video we'll look at how to create some
advanced charts in Excel. We'll first create tree maps, then scatter charts, and lastly histograms.
Please note that the price and resale values in this sample data set
are not real and are merely used for explanatory and demonstration purposes.
Let's start with tree maps. A tree map chart is used to compare values across hierarchy levels
and show proportions within hierarchical levels as rectangles. Tree maps are a good way of displaying
lots of data in one graphical asset because they use the color and closeness of proportional shapes
within the chart to represent hierarchical data categories. Which is a difficult thing to achieve
with most other types of chart. In the tree map worksheet of the car sales workbook let's first
select the data from two non-adjacent columns model and unit sales. Now let's create a tree map
chart with this data. We select tree map chart from the hierarchy category of the charts group. We now
see a floating chart area containing our tree map chart which displays the proportion of the unit
sales of Ford cars within hierarchical levels as rectangles. Let's change the chart title to
unit sales of Ford cars which we can do by simply double-clicking the chart title text box and
editing the text. Let's change the chart style to customize the look of the tree map chart. There are
numerous styles to choose from in the gallery for example here we've chosen style 2. We can easily
see from this tree map chart that the f-series model is by far the biggest proportion of our Ford
car sales. Followed by the explorer and tourist models. which constitute a similar proportion
of our Ford car sales. While the contour model shows the smallest proportion of Ford car sales
Next, let's have a look at scatter charts. A scatter chart is a type of graph used to compare two sets
of numerical data values and show relationships between those sets of numerical values.
A scatter chart combines the two sets of values on the x and y axes into single points of data
and then displays them in clusters in the chart. For this reason you will also sometimes see them
referred to as xy charts. Common uses include the comparison of statistical scientific or
engineering data values. To create our scatter chart let's first select the data from two
adjacent columns price and year resale value in the scatter worksheet of the car sales workbook.
Now let's create a scatter chart with this data we select scatter chart from the x y scatter
category of the charts group which compares the price of cars from all manufacturers with
their year resale value let's change the chart title to comparing price with year resale value,
which we can do by simply double-clicking the chart titled text box and editing the text. Let's
change the chart style to customize the look of the scatter chart there are numerous styles to
choose from in the gallery for example here we've chosen style 8. Now let's add some axis titles
for both the horizontal x-axis and the vertical y-axis. We'll call the horizontal retail price
and the vertical year resale value. We can see from this scatter chart that as the retail price
increases so does the differential between the retail price and the year resale value. Generally
speaking the lower priced cars retain their resale value after one year better than the higher priced
cars. Lastly let's have a look at histograms. A histogram is a graph that shows the distribution
of the data grouped into bins. Although a histogram may look like a column or bar chart it's totally
different while a bar chart is used to compare data a histogram is used to display distribution
of data. To create our histogram let's first select the data from two non-adjacent columns model and
price in the histogram worksheet of the car sales workbook. Now let's create a histogram with this
data we select histogram from the statistical category of the charts group. The new floating
chart area contains our histogram. Which displays frequency distribution of the price of cars from
all manufacturers. Note how Excel automatically puts the different price ranges into nine equally
sized separate bins for you. The first bin contains cars priced between nine thousand two hundred and
thirty five dollars and eighteen thousand six hundred and thirty five. The second bin contains
cars priced between eighteen thousand six hundred and thirty five dollars and twenty eight thousand
thirty five dollars and so on. Up to a maximum price range of eighty four thousand four hundred
and thirty five dollars to ninety three thousand hundred 835. Let's change the chart title to count
of car models by price range which we can do by simply double-clicking the chart title text box
and editing the text. Let's change the chart style to customize the look of the histogram.
There are numerous styles again to choose from in the gallery for example here we've chosen style 3.
this style shows the count values of the individual rectangles for each price range
rather than using a vertical scale on the y-axis so from this histogram chart we can easily see
that the largest proportion of car models are in the 18635 dollar to 2835 price range.
With a count of 62 models in this range, followed by the cheapest price range of 9235 to 18
635 dollars which has a count of 42 models and the fewest count of models in a price range is
shared by the two most expensive price ranges with only one model in each bin. Although Excel
chooses your bin ranges automatically when you create a histogram, you can change the bin sizes
to suit your needs. This is done by opening the formatting pane for the relevant chart element.
In this case the horizontal axis in the axis options section you can choose to display bins
by several factors including bin width and by number of bins. For example, when we change the
bin width value you can now see 15 bins in the chart because the price ranges are much narrower.
Bins 2 and 3 have the two highest counts of 34 and 33 respectively and bin 14 shows no models in
this price range at all and if we change the axis options to display a set number of bins then the
histogram updates again to show the price ranges split into the number of bins specified. That is 10
bins and once again we can see that bin 2 has the largest proportion of models in its price range
and if we choose automatic then the histogram reverts back to the format we started with.
In this video we learned how to create tree maps, scatter charts, and histograms in Excel.
In the next video we'll look at some of the other
advanced charts available in Excel like filled map charts and sparklines.