In this video, we will listen to
several data professionals discuss
the importance of using
visualizations to tell a story about data.
Can you tell us about the importance of using
visualizations to tell a story about data.
Visualizations are critical to storytelling with data.
I think you're familiar with the phrase,
a picture is worth 1,000 words,
and that's really true here.
You can get a much clearer picture of what's going on,
with your data if you
have clean and clear data visualizations.
I also think data visualization is super
helpful for the analysts that creates them,
because it forces them to make choices about
what's really important to show
and what isn't important to show.
For example, if you're debating
whether you should look at things temporally,
you can debate like,
is the overall trend the most important, okay,
then I should do a time series data visualization.
Do I think comparing one group versus another is
more important than you're more
likely to do a bar column chart.
So it's really important in clarifying
the data analysts thinking
And visualization is really important in telling a clear,
concise story to stakeholders.
Humans are visual creatures.
You are more likely to tell
a compelling story and get buy-in with visuals.
I once got a job offer,
with a visualized resume created by tableau.
So, one of the best ways to present data is visually.
Numbers by themself, for the most part,
will tend to overwhelm people.
So if I woke up
and I'm talking in a company meeting and I say,
"Well, last year in 2019, we did $100,000."
Or I could give you a graph and say 2018,
we did 75,000, 2019,
we did 100,000, and 2020 we're projected to do $125,000.
If I put them in a graph and make it
stand out and make it pretty.
Non-accountants will and non-data people will
gravitate towards the end it'll prompt them to
ask different questions and have different ideas.
By using maybe a PowerPoint
or even Excel. In Excel you can create graphs from the data,
make it pretty, make sure that
it made not just pretty but make sure
that it highlights the important information
of what you're trying to say.
It will create and drive the conversation around what
needs to be done and how best to
maybe run the business or make different decisions.
Data visualization is a very important part
of being helping people
to understand the numbers that you're trying to present.
The reason we want to gravitate towards
visualizations is that's how the brain really works.
The brain is much more able to
process a high bar versus a low bar as
opposed to looking at
100 rows or 100 lines in a spreadsheet.
Using the visualizations and especially
using the appropriate visualization for
the given task can really help make sure that
the user gets the easiest way to understand this.
As we talked about storytelling is
really an important way for us to do this.
And so through the visualizations,
that's really how we tell stories.
We can augment it with,
text that's user-generated or system-generated,
tell people really drill down
further to their understanding.
But starting with the visualization
is the easiest way to help people quickly,
effectively understand what's going on.
And then you can have further discussions
around what exactly they're doing.