Welcome to Walkthrough the flight delay time statistics dashboard lab.
After watching this video,
you'll be able to describe
the Skills Network labs cloud IDE environment,
analyze flight on time data by
creating line graphs with dashboard components,
create the layout of the Dash application,
list the steps to run and launch the application.
We'll be using the Skills Network labs,
SN labs, cloud IDE environment for this activity.
Skills Network labs cloud IDE provides a hand-on
environment in your web browser for
completing course and project-related labs.
It utilizes thea, an open source IDE platform
that can run on a desktop or the Cloud.
When you open the lab,
the screen will have two sides.
On the left side,
you'll see the labs instructions.
On the right side is
the Integrated Development Environment, IDE,
where you'll complete the following;
use terminal, write code, and so on.
Let's have a closer look at this IDE window.
At the top, there is a core menu that
comprises of sub menus to help you create new files,
save, run, and debug a terminal sub menu and so on.
On the left side is
a project-specific menu where you can
find options to launch your application.
To open a new terminal,
click the terminal in
the core menu and then click new terminal.
Here, we have completed it.
Great, let's start with the lab.
We will work on the airline reporting carrier on time.
The performance dataset source from
the data asset exchange encompasses details on
nearly 200 million domestic US flights reported
to the United States Bureau of Transportation Statistics.
It includes essential details about each flight,
such as the time, date,
departure airport, arrival airport,
duration of flight delay,
and information pertaining to the cause of the delay.
You will analyze flight delays in a dashboard.
You'll be creating five line graphs with
dashboard components for monthly average carrier delay,
monthly average weather delay,
monthly average national air system delay,
monthly average security delay,
monthly average late aircraft delay
by reporting airline for the given year.
One, in the terminal,
install all the required packages
as mentioned in the instructions,
copy the PIP commands.
Two, paste it into the terminal and
then press Shift plus Enter to execute them.
Do this for all three PIP commands one by one.
It will take a while.
Let's now create a new script file to write the code.
One, click file in
the core menu bar and then click New File.
Two, a pop out prompt will appear on the screen.
Here, mention the name of
this file as indicated in the instructions,
flight_delay.py and click "Okay".
Three, here it is.
The file is ready and open in the IDE.
First we need to import the libraries
and pull the dataset into the script file.
One, the instruction side of
the screen mentions all the required libraries.
Additionally, the code
mentioned to fetch the dataset with pandas
is airline_data equals pd.read_csv.
Two, copy and paste them into the script file.
Three, as shown here.
Now it's time to design the layout of the app.
One, we will first create
the dash app by calling the dash function,
app equals dash.dash function.
Two, to add a layout division using HTML,
you can utilize the dcc.input function tag
inside the layout division along
with the div function and input components.
Three, using the display as flex for
two outer divisions to get graphs side-by-side in a row.
Four, write or copy the code from the instructions
and paste it into the script file
below the previous code.
Now that we have the skeleton,
let's include the components.
One, the title will go in the
html.H1 function as a string,
and you can style the text.
Two, inside the first HTML division,
which we refer to as the dcc.input tag,
the input component can be
customized with various attributes.
For instance, you can assign the ID as input year,
set the value as 2010,
specify the type as number,
and even customize the style
attributes such as height and font size.
One, when utilizing this dial parameter,
you can actively add different graphs to the divisions.
We assign display as flex
to place two plots side-by-side in a row.
Use dcc.graph tag for
including the plot and give each plot an ID.
For the year input by user,
we need to compute the airline data
and make charts and plots.
One, let's call this function compute_info.
Pass the dataset and the input year as arguments,
the function should return
all the average delays for that year.
Two, within this function,
we will aggregate the specific delay by grouping
the dataset for the month and
the reporting airlines features.
You can compute all the delays as individual plots.
But best practice would be to create a function.
As we need our dashboard to update in
real time based on the year value input by the user,
we will now create a callback function.
First, we will create a callback decorator.
One, update the output component
ID parameter with the IDs provided in the
dcc.graph function component for all five components we
created and set the component property
as a figure, like this.
Two, and then update the input component ID
parameter with the ID and set the property as value.
Three, then create a callback function that
uses the input provided to perform the computation.
Four, create a graph in
this function and return it as an output.
Five, lastly, call the run.server function on the app.
Six, good work.
Seven, to run this application,
use the command python3flight_delay.py in the terminal.
One, you will get
the port number after you run the application.
Two, now you need to launch it.
Click the Skills Network Toolbox.
Three, then click the Launch Application.
Four, enter the port number,
in this case 8050 in the application port box.
Five, and then click your application.
Six, the output should look like this.
In this video, we have
walked through the lab where you developed
a dashboard with dash framework
on flight delay time statistics.