In this video we will listen to several data professionals discuss their experience using
pivot tables to analyze data.
What are your experiences using pivot tables to analyze data?
My experience using pivot tables in Excel is extensive.
I can use them all the time.
The thing to keep in mind is that you can sum, average, and count easily.
You can set it to group-by so people can choose what the parameters are at the top.
It's great if you've got a couple of thousand records all the way up to whatever Excel can
handle.
So, a pivot table is just a real simple way of manipulation without having to do any actual
querying or development language.
I once had a huge ecommerce sales data.
I need to analyze the KPI's including gross merchandise volume and take rate.
However, I can only generate limited insights if I stay at high level
With pivot tables I was able to group the data in terms of countries, type of stores,
type of products, which enabled me to view the data and analyze the key KPI's at different
levels of granularity.
I use pivot tables and we use pivot tables in our firm, especially during audits to assist
us and help us to kind of drill down on the data because what a pivot table does is, it
helps you to take a large set of data and whittle it down to something that's meaningful.
So, in the case of audits, a client might have, you know, $500,000 worth of maintenance
and repair bills that are made up of three-hundred invoices.
But we don't want to see every invoice for every dollar we want to see the high dollar
invoices, so we're going to use that pivot table to narrow it down to the invoices that
actually are going to have the highest level of impact on the financial statement.
Much like Excel, pivot tables are a great way to understand your data quickly and effectively.
Being able to just open up an Excel sheet, put it into a pivot table, drag and drop things
in to get a sense of what the numbers look like, what the values are, really can help
you get a good sense of the data in order to then start to build out something a little
bit more robust.
Being able to understand the fields, what they mean, what they look like.
These are all things that can help you at the start of a project, as you're looking
to do your analysis.
Pivot tables are incredibly useful to get a quick view of your data and to look at multiple
levels of your data in a very quick and clean way.
It's just very, very easy to create a pivot table on a set of raw data, aggregate it by
some level of interest, be it country, be it you know country the user is from, be it
the year the user joined, or anything else, be it something related to time.
It's really good for quickly seeing and understanding some of the more high-level summaries that
are hidden within your data.