Now that you've had an introduction to functions,
seeing the use of some common statistical functions and
learned about some of the more advanced functions that a data
analyst might use, in this video will look at the difference
between relative, absolute, and mixed references in formulas as
well as how to use them. And we'll learn about formula errors
in Excel. It's important to understand the difference
between relative and absolute references when creating your
formulas. By default, in Excel, cell references are always
relative references. The term relative is the key here,
because it means that when you reference a cell, you are in
fact referencing the cells position in relation to the cell
that the formula is in.
That is why when we have been copying formulas from one cell
to another so far in this course, using either copy and paste or
the fill handle, we haven't needed to modify the cell
references because Excel assumes you are using relative
references. When the formulas are copied, the cell references
are changed to match the relative positions of the cells
that are being copied to.
So now we know that relative references are the default in
Excel, but how do we make it so that the cell references don't
change when we copy them? For that you need to use absolute
references in contrast to relative references. Absolute
references to cells stayed the same. When you copy a formula
containing such references.
Lastly, there may also be some instances where you only want
one of the cell reference identifiers to be absolute and
the other one to be relative. For example, you might want the
row identifier to be absolute, but the column Identifier to be
relative, or vice versa. These are called mixed references and.
An example of this would be =A$1
+$A3 where A$1.
Has a relative column and an absolute row or $A3
has an absolute column. And a
relative row. In contrast to relative and absolute
references, when you copy a formula containing mixed cell
references, any relative cell references will change, whereas
any absolute cell references will stay the same in the copied
formula. First, let's look at an example of using relative
references in a formula. For example, if we enter the formula
=A1+A3 in cell four note the blue and red highlighted
cells in A1 and A3. These denote the cells being
relatively referenced in the formula. If we copy the formula
to the cell directly below using the fill handle, we can see that
the result changes, and if we look at the copied formula.
You can see that the blue and red cell references have changed
relative to their position on the worksheet. The formula has
been changed to =A2+A4 in the copied formula. That
is, each cell reference has moved one cell down and if we
copy and paste the formula to C7, you can see that the
results also changes and again we can see that the blue and red
cell references in the copied formula have changed now.
Let's look at an example of how to use absolute references in a
formula. All you need to do to make a cell reference absolute
is put a dollar sign in front of the column and or row
identifiers in the formula. For example, if we enter the formula
equals $A$1+$A$3 in cell E4. Note
the blue and red highlighted cells in A1 and A3.
These denote the cells being.
Absolutely referenced in the formula. When we copy the
formula using the fill handle, you can see that the result
stays the same this time and if we look at the copied formula
you can see that the blue and red cell references haven't
changed. The formula is still =$A$1
+$A$3 in the copied formula. That is, the
cell references haven't changed.
Similarly, if we then copy and paste the formula to E7, you can
again see that the result stays the same this time and we can
see that the blue and red cell references haven't changed. The
formula is still =$A$1+
$A$3 in the copied formula. That is, the cell
references haven't changed. Lastly, will look at an example
of how to use mixed references in a formula so.
If we enter the formula =A$1+ $A3
in cell G4. Note the blue and red highlighted cells in A1 and
A3. These denote the cells being referenced in the formula.
If we copy the formula to the cell below using the fill
handle, you can see that the result changes, but it's a
different result from the previous examples. And if we
look at the copied formula, you can see that the first blue cell
reference has stayed the same.
But the second red cell reference has changed. If we
copy and paste the formula to G7, you can see that the same
thing happens. The result changes and again we can see
that the first blue cell reference has stayed the same in
the copied formula, while only the red cell reference has
changed. Now we'll have a quick introduction to dealing with
formula errors in Excel.
Because of the complexity of writing formulas, especially the
more complicated ones, there are bound to be occasions when you
make a mistake in the syntax or in the data selection which will
lead to a formula error. Errors are typically denoted by
displaying in the cell that is supposed to be displaying the
result. One of the error codes in this list when you see
multiple hash symbols in a cell, it's not really an error, it
just means the column either isn't wide enough to display the
whole word or value.
Or it contains a negative date or time value?
So if we type control plus semi colon, then space then control
plus shift plus semi colon, it enters today's date and the
current time. But the cell is too narrow to display it. So
what we see is multiple hash symbols. If we adjust the column
width we can now see the cell contents. So as I said, this
really shouldn't be considered as an error. However if we enter
the formula seen in Cell I7.
When we press enter, we see a hash name error. This error was
caused by trying to use an X as a multiplication operator when
in fact it should be an asterisk. Note the small green
triangle in the top left corner of the cell.
Also note that when you select the cell an exclamation mark
appears, providing you with a hint about what caused the
error. In this case it says the formula contains unrecognized
text. When you click the dropdown error next to the
exclamation mark for an error, you see several options. The
first line also gives you a clue on the nature of the error. This
one says invalid name error, so it was probably a mistyped cell
reference value or function
name. If you click help on this error, a help pane opens with
specific information related to this error. If you click show
calculation steps, a dialog box opens displaying the current
syntax with the error underlined. And you can try to
evaluate the error if you are certain the error is incorrect,
you can choose ignore error, and if you want to edit the
formula, click edit in Formula Bar and the cursor will be
focused in the formula bar so that you can try and correct
the formula error.
If you click error checking options, the Excel Options
Dialog Box is opened at the section related to error
checking rules and you can modify these options to suit
your needs. Each of the errors you make which generate one of
the error codes listed at the start of this video will have a
different reason and a different solution For more information on
each of these errors and typical solutions visit the link
provided. In this video we learned about referencing data
in formulas, specifically differentiating between
relative, absolute, and mixed references, and how to use them.
And we learned about formula errors in Excel.