Hello and welcome to this video on
accessing databases using SQL Magic.
In this video, you will learn what Magic Statements are,
the difference between line magics and cell magics,
some popularly used magic statements,
and how to use SQL Magic in
Jupyter Notebooks access databases.
What are magic statements in Jupyter Notebooks?
Magic commands or magic functions are special commands in
Jupyter Notebooks that provide special functionalities.
They are not valid Python code
but affect the behavior of the notebook.
They are designed to solve various common problems
in standard data analysis.
There are two types of magic statements
in Jupyter notebooks,
line magics and cell magics.
Line magics in Jupyter notebooks
are commands that are prefixed with
a single percentage character
and operate on a single line of input.
They are like command line calls in a terminal shell.
On the other hand, cell magics are prefixed with
two percentage characters and
operate on multiple lines of input.
They can even transform the entire cell or
execute the cell in a different programming language.
Some popularly used Line Magics
in Jupyter notebooks, %pwd.
This command prints the current working directory.
Percentage LS, this command
lists all files in the current directory.
Percentage history.
This command shows the command history.
Percentage reset. This command resets the namespace by
removing all names defined by the user. Percentage who.
This command lists all variables in the namespace.
Percentage, whos.
This command provides more detailed information
about all variables in the namespace.
Percentage matplotlib inline.
This command makes matplotlib plots
appear within the notebook.
Percentage timeit,
which times the execution of a single statement.
To get a list of all available Line Magics you
can use the percentage LS magic command.
You can use multiple line magics
in a single cell in a Jupyter Notebook.
Each line magic should be on its own line.
For example, percentage pwd, percentage is.
This will print the current working directory
and then list all files in the current directory.
Remember, line magics operate on a single line of input.
You can use as many as you need in
a single cell if each is on its own line.
Some line magic statements can
also be used as cell magic statements,
which would change the way they respond.
For instance, percentage timeit would
generate response with the time
required to execute a single statement.
Whereas percentage percentage timeit
times the execution of the entire cell.
Another example where cell magics are
uniquely applicable is writefile.
Since percentage percentage writefile,
my file.text writes the contents
of the cell to myfile text.
Cell magics are not just limited to
Python, they allow you to run code in other languages too.
Let's see some examples.
Percentage, percentage HTML cell magic
allows you to write HTML code in your cell,
and it will be rendered accordingly.
For example, the use of HTML code displays the text,
Hello World as a heading,
percentage percentage Javascript, or
percentage percentage JS Cell magic
allows you to write Javascript code in your cell.
For example, the use of Javascript code generates
a web page pop-up with the display message, Hello World.
Percentage percentage bash cell magic
allows you to write bash commands.
For example, the use of
bash script statement echo generates the text,
Hello world, as will be received in a terminal.
Before you can use SQL Magic,
however, you will need to install some dependencies.
First, install the iPython_SQL library,
which allows SQL magic.
You can do this by running exclamation pip,
install- iPython SQL in a code cell of a notebook.
Next to use the SQL Magic in Jupyter Notebook,
you need to load the SQL extension
using percentage load_ext SQL.
Then you can run SQL queries by
entering Percentage SQL or
Percentage Percentage SQL depending
on whether you want to use line or cell magic.
Before running the queries however,
you need to establish a connection between
the SQL server and the SQL Magic module of the notebook.
As an example, let us explore the use of
SQL Magic with the SQL Lite3 database server.
We first need to establish a connection to a database,
say HR.db using SQL Lite3.
Next, you load
the external SQL module using %load_extsql.
Now you need to establish a connection for
the SQL magic module to the SQL server being accessed.
This is done using the statement %sql sqlite:\\\HR.db.
Now you can use SQL magic
for executing any kind of queries on the table.
A sample is shown here for displaying the contents
of employee table in the HR database.
Let's list the concepts you have learned.
Now you can describe magic statements,
differentiate line magics, and cell magics.
Discuss some popularly used magic statements,
explain the use of SQL Magic in
Jupyter notebooks to access databases.