>> Hello and welcome to alter, drop and truncate tables.
After watching this video, you will be able to describe the alter table, drop
table and truncate statements, explain the syntax, and use the statements in queries.
You use the alter table statement to add or
remove columns from a table, to modify the data type of columns,
to add or remove keys, and to add or remove constraints.
The syntax of the alter table statement is shown here.
You start with alter table followed by the name of the table
that you want to alter differently to the create table statement.
Though you do not use parentheses to enclose the parameters for
the alter table statement, each row in the alter table statement specifies
one change that you want to make to the table.
For example, to add a telephone number column to the author table
in the library database to store the authors telephone number,
use the following alter table author add column telephone number
bigint semicolon in this example, the data type for
the column is bigint, which can hold a number up to 19 digits long.
You can also use the alter table statement to modify the data type of a column.
To do this, use the modify clause specifying the new data type for
the column.
For example, using a numeric data type for telephone number means that you
cannot include parentheses, plus signs or dashes as part of the number.
You can change the column to use the CHAR data type to overcome this.
This code shows how to alter the author table,
ALTER TABLE author MODIFY telephone underscore number CHAR 20.
Altering the data type of a column containing existing data can cause
problems though, if the existing data is not compatible with a new data type.
For example, changing a column from the car data type to a numeric data
type will not work if the column already contains non numeric data.
If you try to do this, you will see an error message in the notification log and
the statement will not run if your spec changes and
you no longer need this extra column, you can again use the alter tables statement,
this time with the drop column clause to remove the column as shown.
Alter table author drop column telephone number similar to
using drop column to delete a column from a table,
you use the drop table statement to delete a table from a database.
If you delete a table that contains data,
by default the data will be deleted alongside the table.
The syntax for
the DROP TABLE statement is DROP TABLE table underscore name semicolon.
You use this statement,
DROP TABLE author semicolon to remove the table from the database.
Sometimes you might want to just delete the data in a table rather than deleting
the table itself.
While you can use the delete statement without a where clause.
To do this, it is generally quicker and more efficient to truncate the table.
Instead, you use the truncate table statement to delete all of the rows in
a table.
The syntax of this statement is TRUNCATE TABLE table underscore name
IMMEDIATE semicolon.
The immediate specifies to process the statement immediately and
that it cannot be undone.
To truncate the author table, you use this statement,
TRUNCATE TABLE author IMMEDIATE semicolon.
In this video, you learned that the alter table statement changes the structure of
an existing table.
For example, to add, modify, or drop columns,
the drop table statement deletes an existing table, and
the truncate table statement deletes all rows of data in a table.