Hello and welcome.
In this video you'll learn how to write sub queries or nested
select statements.
Sub queries or sub selects are like regular queries but placed within parentheses
and nested inside another query.
This allows you to form more powerful queries than would have
been otherwise possible.
An example of a nested query is shown in this example the sub query is
inside the Where clause of another query.
Consider the employees table from the previous video.
The first few rows of data are shown here.
The table contains several columns, including an
employee ID first name, last name, salary, etc.
We will now go over some examples involving this
table.
Let's consider a scenario which may necessitate the use of sub queries.
Let's say we want to retrieve the list of employees who earn more than the average salary.
To do so we could try this code: select star from
employees where salary is greater than average salary.
However, running this query will result in an error like the one shown, indicating
an invalid use of the aggregate function.
One of the limitations of built-in aggregate
functions like the average function is that they
cannot always be evaluated in the where clause.
So, to evaluate a function like average in the
Where clause, we could make use of a sub-select expression like the one shown here: select
employee ID, first name, last name, salary from employees
where salary is less than, open parenthesis, select
average salary from employees, close parenthesis.
Notice that the average function is evaluated in the first part of the sub
query, allowing us to circumvent the limitation of evaluating it directly in the where clause
The subselect doesn't just have to go in the WHERE clause, it can also go in other parts
of the query such as in the list of columns to be selected.
Such sub queries are called
Column Expressions.
Now let's look at a scenario where we might want to use a Column Expression.
Say we wanted to compare the salary of each employee with the average salary.
We could try a query like: select employee ID, salary,
average salary, as average salary from employees.
Running this query will result in an error, indicating that no Group by Clause is specified.
We can circumvent this error by using the average function in a sub query placed in
the list of the columns.
For example select employee ID, salary, open left parenthesis,
select average salary from employees, close right
parenthesis, as average salary from employees.
Another option is to make the sub query be part of the From clause.
Sub queries like these are sometimes called Derived Tables or Table
Expressions because the outer query uses the results of the sub query as a data source.
Let's look at an example to create a table expression
that contains non-sensitive employee information select star from select employee ID, first
name, last name, Department ID from employees, as
employee for all.
The derived table in the sub query does not include sensitive fields like date of
birth or salary.
This example is a trivial one and we could just as easily have included the columns in
the outer query, however such derived tables can
prove to be powerful in more complex situations,
such as when working with multiple tables and doing
joins.
In this video you have seen how subqueries and nested queries can be used to form richer
queries and how they can overcome some of the limitations of aggregate functions.
You also learn to use subqueries in the Where clause, in the list of columns, and
in the From clause.
Thanks for watching this video!