Hello and welcome. In this video you will learn how to write
queries that access more than one table. There are several ways to access
multiple tables in the same query, namely, using sub-queries,
implicit join, and join operators such as inner join and
outer join. In this video,
we'll examine the first two options. The third option is covered in
more detail in other videos. Let's consider the Employees and
Departments tables from a previous video. The Employees table contains
several columns for categories such as Employee id, first
name, last name, and salary to name a few. The Departments table
contains a department ID, department name, manager ID,
and location ID. Some sample data from these tables is shown here. We
will utilize these tables for the examples in this video. In a previous video,
we learned how to use sub-queries. Now, let's use sub-queries to
work with multiple tables. If we want to retrieve only the employee
records from the Employees table for which a Department ID exists
in the Departments table, we can use a subquery as select star
from Employees where Department ID in Select Department ID Department
from Departments. Here the outer query accesses the Employees table,
and the sub-query on the Departments table is used for filtering the result
set of the outer query. Let's say we want to retrieve only
the list of employees from a specific location. We do not have any location information
in the Employees table, but the Departments table has
a column called Location id. Therefore, we can use a sub-query from the Departments
table as input to the Employee table query as follow, select * from employees
where DEP_ID in select DEP_ID_DEP from departments where LOC_ID=L0002.
Now let's retrieve the department ID and
department name for employees who earn more than $70,000. To do so, we will need a sub-query
on the Employees table to satisfy the salary criteria, and
then feed it as input to an outer query on the Departments table in order to
get the matching department info. Select department ID department
department name from departments where department ID department
n select department ID from employees where salary is greater than 70,000. We
can also access multiple tables by specifying them in the from clause
of the query. Consider the example select * from employees, departments.
Here we specify two tables in the from clause. This results in
a table join, but note we are not explicitly using the join operator. The resulting
join in this example is called a full join
because every row in the first table is joined with every row in the second table. If you examine
the results set, you will see more rows than in both tables individually.
We can use additional operands to limit the result set. Let's
look at an example where we limit the result set to only rows
with matching department IDs. Select * from employees, departments where
employees.DET_ID= departments.DEPT_ID_DET. Notice that in the where clause we
prefix the name of the column with the name of the table. This is to fully qualify the column name,
since it's possible that different tables could have some column names
that are exactly the same. Since the table names
can sometimes be long, we can use shorter aliases for
table names as shown here. Select* from employees E, departments D where E.DEP_ID=D.DEP_ID_DEP.
Here we define the alias E for Employees table and D for
Departments table, and then use these aliases in the where
clause. If we wanted to see the department name for each employee, we would enter the
code as follows. Select EMP_ID, DEP_NAME from employees E, departments D where
E.DEP_ID= D.DEP_ID_DEP. Similar to before, the column names
in the select clause can also be prefixed by aliases,
as shown in the query. Select E.EMP_ID, D.DEP_ID_DEP from employees E, departments
D where E.DEP_ID=D.DEP_ID_DEP. In this lesson, we have shown you
how to work with multiple tables using sub-queries and implicit joins. Thanks for watching.