Welcome to this video on measures for in-sample evaluation.
These measures are a way to determine how well the model fits our data numerically.
Two important measures that we often use to determine the fit of a model are
Mean Square Error, or MSE, and R-Squared value.
To measure the MSE, you find the difference between the actual value y and
the predicted value y hat then square it.
In this case, the actual value is 150.
The predicted value is 50.
Subtracting these points, we get 100.
We then square the number.
Next, take the mean or average of all the errors by adding
them all together and dividing by the number of samples.
To find the MSE in Python, we can import the mean squared error function
from the scikit-learn metrics library.
The mean squared error function gets two inputs: the actual value of the target
variable and the predicted value of the target variable.
R-squared is also called the coefficient of determination.
It's a measure to determine how closely fitted the regression line is to
the actual data.
Consider a simple base model that uses the average value of the data points,
the y bar, as the estimate.
The R-squared value compares the performance of the fitted regression line
against this average value.
In this example, the average of the data points y bar is 10.
The coefficient of determination, or R-squared value,
is calculated by subtracting the ratio of the MSE
with respect to the regression line divided by the MSE with respect to
the average of the data points from 1, as shown in this equation.
For the most part, the value of R-squared is between 0 and 1.
If the values on the regression line are represented as y hat and
the average value is defined as y bar, we can write the function as shown.
R-squared equal to 1 minus the mean square error of y and
y hat divided by the mean square error of y and y bar.
Let's look at a case where the line provides a relatively good fit.
The blue line represents the regression line or our prediction, y hat.
The total area of the blue squares represents the squared error with respect
to the regression line.
The red line represents the average value of the y values of the data points y bar.
The squared error with respect to the average value is shown by the total area
of the red squares.
We see the total area of the blue squares is much smaller than the total area of
the red squares.
In this case, since the regression line is a good fit, the mean squared error
with respect to the line is small, and therefore, the numerator is small.
The denominator is large since the mean squared error compared
to the average value is relatively large, therefore,
the ratio of the two values is an even smaller number.
As the MSE with respect to the average increases, or the MSE with
respect to the regression line decreases, the ratio begins to approach 0.
In this case, the ratio of these two mean square errors is quite small,
meaning the R-squared value is close to 1.
Because the ratio gets subtracted from 1, 1 minus 0 is 1.
Here is an example of a line that does not fit the data well.
If we just examine the area of the red squares compared to the blue squares,
we see their total areas are closer to each other than in the previous example.
Therefore, since the numerator and denominator are similar,
the ratio of the areas is close to 1.
In this case, the R-squared comes out to be near 0.
The interpretation is that the regression line has performed just as well as using
the average value would have.
Therefore, it can be concluded that if R-squared approaches 0,
the regression line is a poor fit to the data.
We find the R-squared value in Python by using the score method in the linear
regression object, the output of these values is about 0.497.
Therefore, we can say that approximately 49.7% of
the variation in price is explained by this simple linear model.