In this video, we will learn about data privacy and the regulations that govern the collected
data. When collecting customer data, specific regulations
apply to how that data can used. By understanding data privacy regulations and getting familiar
with the following three fundamentals, you can eliminate the risk of financial penalties
and keep the trust of your customers. Confidentiality, Collection and Use, Compliance.
Confidentiality is an important element in data privacy and it acknowledges that the
customer’s personal information belongs to them. The types of information that can
be accessed by a data analyst can range from sales forecasts, to employee information,
or even patient records. When accessing these types of records the analyst must be able
to recognize the different types of personal data.
Personal Information or PI is any type of information that can be traced back to a specific
individual. This type of information can include anything from emails to images.
Personally Identifiable Information or PII is specific information that could be used
to identify an individual. This type of information could include a social security number or
a driver’s license number. And lastly , Sensitive Personal Information
or SPI, may not necessarily identify a specific individual, but contains private information
that needs to be protected because if made public it could possibly be use to harm the
individual. The type of information can include data about race, sexual orientation, biometric
or genetic information. By understanding personal data and the associated
regulations, we can efficiently anonymize our data by removing unnecessary information.
This type of action can help build consumer confidence and continue to develop the free
flow of information. When searching through data, the analyst must
know the location of the company collecting the data and the location of the respondent.
Knowing where the data was collected is an essential element of data privacy and what
regulations must be applied.The General Data Protection Regulation or
GDPR is a regulation specific to the European Union, and only applies to the jurisdiction
of the individual. A new law created in Brazil, the LGPD, will
take effect in August 2020. These new data policy regulations apply to individuals within
Brazil, and ignores the location of the data processor.
While the United States does not have one country-wide principle law for data privacy.
Because of this individual states began to make their own regulations. For instance,
California created the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) to better protect customer
data. There are also industry specific regulations
that govern the collection and use of sensitive and personal data. For example, in Healthcare,
HIPAA privacy rules govern the collection and disclosure of protected health information.
In retail, the PCI standards govern credit card data, and failure to safeguard cardholder
information can result in hefty fines. With a basic understanding of these policies,
we are able to remain compliant when handling any sensitive information.
Unfortunately, breeches in customer data is an all too common occurrence and understanding
how to remain compliant is essential. Understanding the data privacy regulations of the European
Union, the United States, and other countries as well as industries is key to keeping data
safe. Companies must comply with these privacy regulations at all times and also make sure
policies are readily accessible to employees. For example, let’s say a data analyst downloads
a spreadsheet of sensitive information. In order to complete the report by Monday morning,
the analyst decided to take their work laptop home for the weekend. After driving home,
the analyst accidently left the laptop in their car. The next morning, they found their
car had been stolen along with the laptop. Because it is the responsibility of the company
to keep customer data safe, this was a breach of privacy when the data left company property.
This type of action could not only cost the company large amounts of money in fines and
penalties, but could also reduce consumer confidence causing a significant impact to
revenue. While data privacy applies to most data that
is collected, there are some instances where these regulations do not apply. In order for
these laws and regulations not to apply, the particular collection of data must be completely
anonymous. To make data anonymous means to exclude all data which ties it back to a particular
individual. While this approach might not be practical in all circumstances, collecting
data with privacy in mind could remove privacy limitations and make data collections more
accessible. In this video we learned about the importance
of data privacy and the challenges that a data analyst can face when collecting and
sorting through data. In the videos in the next lesson, we will learn about different
methods for cleaning data in a spreadsheet.