Now that we have learned how to collect and clean our data, it is time to decide the best
method for analysis.
In this video, we will discuss the importance of filtering, sorting, performing calculations,
and shaping our data to provide meaningful information.
Deciding how to manipulate our data can sometimes be difficult.
Before we make any changes or adjustments, we will need to visualize the final output.
Below are some questions to ask before beginning the task.
How big is the dataset?
What type of filtering is required to find the necessary information?
How should the data be sorted?
What type of calculations are needed?
Now that we have visualized the final output, we must decide the best approach to shape
our data.
The most basic step would be to filter and sort the data.
By sorting the data, we are able to organize it based on conditions such as alphabetically
or numerically.
For example, if we wanted to check for duplicate order numbers, we could sort the data and
quickly see any duplicates.
After sorting and removing the duplicate row, we find that the view needs to be more specific
to meet our requirements.
We now decide that we only want to see the data for the month of November.
By adding a filter, we can now choose to only see items with a ‘MONTH_ID” that is equal
to “11”.
By filtering our data, we are now able to only see the rows that meet the filter criteria
and it allows us to better analyze our information.
Becoming familiar with all of the tools to analyze data can seem daunting, but one key
benefit of using a spreadsheet is the ability to use functions.
Functions in Excel are organized by several categories, including mathematical, statistical,
logical, financial, and date and time-based.
Let’s say we wanted to get an average of company revenue for the month of June.
We realize there are over 100 items that would need to be calculated.
In normal circumstances, to get an average, we would have to create a formula to add each
row and divide by the total number of rows.
This type of calculation would not only be very long, but can expose the analyst to possibly
making a mistake.
=B1+B2+B3…/160
With the use of a function, we would be able to simplify our calculation in one easy step.
=AVERAGE(B1:B160)
While sorting and filtering data on our spreadsheet can be useful on its own, first converting
your data to a table has many benefits.
When we convert our data into a table, we are able to filter and calculate the data
more efficiently.
One example is the ability to easily calculate columns.
For the column ‘MSRP’, we choose ‘Sum’ and we’re able to quickly calculate the
sum of the column.
If we then look at the data, and only want to calculate the ‘MSRP’ total based on
Japan, we would filter the ‘Country’ column to only display Japan, and the column would
then only add the values in the rows that were associated with Japan.
While all data may not work in a table, there are quite a few advantages to formatting your
data as a table:
Automatic calculations even when filtering
Column headings never disappear
Banded rows to make reading easier
Tables will automatically expand when adding new rows
Sometimes data needs to be more organized then what a basic tabular format can give
us, and creating pivot tables with charts can be a better way to analyze and display
the required information.
In Excel we have the option of creating a pivot table to display and analyze our data,
and optionally, an associated pivot chart.
For example, let’s say we want to know what company ordered products in the month of October.
From the original table of data, we create a pivot table to organize and analyze the
required data, along with a pivot chart to display the information.
By then adding the month filter to the newly created pivot table, we can see the results
for the month of October not only in the table, but the changes are automatically updated
in the pivot chart.
When trying to single out specific information in a large dataset, a pivot table is a nice
way to show only the information that is required.
This allows us to quickly and easily scan the essential information.
Pivot charts are a nice accessory to pivot tables, as they allow us to visually process
data, and in most cases, will let the audience grasp the information quicker.
The advantages of selecting a pivot table and chart are:
Manipulate data without using formulas
Quickly summarize large data sets
Ability to display engaging charts and graphs
In this video, we learned about the importance of filtering, sorting, performing calculations,
and shaping our data to provide meaningful information, and we learned about some of
the tools to begin analyzing our data.
In the next video, we will learn more about filtering and sorting our data.