Hello, and welcome to this video on analyzing data with Python.
After watching this video, you will be able to perform exploratory data analysis, or EDA,
using Pandas, utilize SQLite 3 with Python for data storage and retrieval, and visualize
data using Seaborn for insights and pattern detection.
In this video, we will be using the McDonald's menu nutritional facts data for popular menu
items at McDonald's, while using Python to perform basic exploratory analysis.
McDonald's is an American fast food company and the world's largest restaurant chain
by revenue.
Although McDonald's is known for fast food items such as hamburgers, french fries, soft
drinks, milkshakes, and desserts, the company has added to its menu salads, fish, smoothies,
and fruit.
McDonald's provides nutrition analysis of their menu items to help you balance your
McDonald's meal with other foods you eat.
The data set used in this lesson has been obtained from the nutritional facts for McDonald's
menu from Kaggle.
We need to create a database table on an SQL server to store the McDonald's menu nutrition
facts data set that we will be using.
We can use SQLite 3, which is an in-process Python library that implements a self-contained,
serverless, zero-configuration transactional SQL database engine.
We can read the database CSV file using the pandas.read underscore CSV function to a variable
say data.
Next, the connection to a database, mcdonalds.db, can be established using SQLite3.connect function
and saving the connection object to a variable, say, conn.
The contents of variable data can then be loaded as a table to the mcdonalds.db database
using the to underscore SQL attribute function of the pandas variable data.
In the example shown here, the contents of the CSV file are now available as a table,
mcdonalds underscore nutrition, which can now be queried as per requirement.
Now let's see how we can use pandas to retrieve data from the database tables.
To do that, we load data from the mcdonalds underscore nutrition table into the data frame
df using the read underscore SQL method.
Then the SQL select query and the connection object are passed as parameters to the read
underscore SQL method.
We can view the first rows of the data frame df that we created using the head method.
Now it's time to learn about your data.
Pandas methods are equipped with a set of common mathematical and statistical methods.
Let's use the describe method to view the summary statistics of the data in the data frame.
Then explore the output of the describe method.
We see that there are 260 observations or food items in our data frame.
We also see that there are nine unique categories of food items in our data frame.
We can also see summary statistics information such as frequency, mean, median, standard
deviation, etc. for the 260 food items across the different variables.
For example, the maximum value for the total fat is 118.
Let's investigate this data further.
Let's try to understand one of the nutrients in the food items, which is sodium.
A main source of sodium is table salt.
The average American eats five or more teaspoons of salt each day.
This is about 20 times as much as the body needs.
Sodium is found naturally in foods, but a lot of it is added during processing and preparation.
Many foods that do not taste salty may still be high in sodium.
Large amounts of sodium can be hidden in canned, processed, and convenience foods.
Sodium controls fluid balance in our bodies and maintains blood volume and blood pressure.
Eating too much sodium may raise blood pressure and cause fluid retention, which could lead
to swelling of the legs and feet or other health issues.
When limiting sodium in your diet, a common target is to eat less than 2,000 milligrams
of sodium per day.
Now using the nutrition data set from McDonald's, let's do some basic data analysis to answer
the question, which food item has the maximum sodium content?
We first use visualization to explore the sodium content of food items.
Using the swarm plot method provided by the Seaborn package, we create a categorical
scatter plot as shown on the right.
And give as the input category on the x-axis, sodium on the y-axis, and the data will be
the data frame df that contains the nutritional data set from McDonald's.
The plot shows the sodium values for the different food items by category.
Notice a high value around 3,600 for sodium on the scatter plot.
We will be learning about visualizations later in this module.
Let's further explore this high sodium value and identify which food items on the menu
have this value for sodium.
Let's do some basic data analysis using Python to find which food items on the menu
have maximum sodium content.
To check the values of sodium levels in the food items within the data set, we use the
code as shown in code 1.
The describe method is used to understand the summary statistics associated with sodium.
Notice that the maximum value of sodium is given as 3,600.
Now let's further explore the row associated with the maximum sodium variable as shown
in code 2.
We use the idxmax method to compute the index values at which the maximum value of sodium
is obtained in the data frame.
We see that the output is 82.
Now let's find the item name associated with the 82nd item in our data frame.
As shown in code 3, we will use the .at method to find the item name by passing the index
of 82 and the column name, item, to be returned for the 82nd row.
Finally, we find that the food item on the menu that has a highest sodium content is
chicken McNuggets, 40 pieces.
Visualizations are very useful for initial data exploration.
They can help us understand relationships, patterns, and outliers in the data.
Let's first create a scatter plot with protein on the x-axis and total fat on the y-axis.
Scatter plots are very popular visualization tools and show the relationship between two
variables with a point for each observation.
To do this, we can use the joint plot function provided by the seaborn package and give,
as input, protein on the x-axis and total fat on the y-axis, and the data will be in
the data frame DF that contains the nutritional data set from McDonald's.
The output scatter plot is shown on the right side.
The plot has an interesting shape.
It shows the correlation between the two variables, protein and fat.
Correlation is a measure of association between two variables and has a value of between negative
one and plus one.
We see that the points on the scatter plot are closer to a straight line in the positive
direction, so we have a positive correlation between the two variables.
On the top right corner of the scatter plot, we have the values of the piercing correlation,
0.81, and the significance of the correlation denoted as p, which is a good value that shows
the variables are certainly correlated.
The plot also shows two histograms, one on the top and the other on the right side.
The histogram on the top is that of the variable protein and the histogram on the right side
is that of the variable total fat.
We also notice that there is a point on the scatter plot outside the general pattern.
This is a possible outlier.
Now let's see how we can visualize data using box plots.
Box plots are charts that indicate the distribution of one or more variables.
The box in a box plot captures the middle 50% of data.
Lines and points indicate possible skewness and outliers.
Let's create a box plot for sugar.
The function we are going to use is boxplot from the seaborn package.
We give the column name sugars as input to the boxplot function.
The output is shown on the right side where we have the boxplot with average values of
sugar in food items around 30 grams.
We also notice a few outliers that indicate food items with extreme values of sugar.
There exist food items in the data set that have sugar content of around 128 grams.
Candies may be among these high sugar content food items on the menu.
Now you know that.
SQLite 3 is an in-process Python library that implements a self-contained, serverless, zero-configuration
transactional SQL database engine.
The pandas.red underscore CSV function is used to read the database CSV file.
The SQLite3.connect function is used to connect to a database.
To use pandas to retrieve data from the database tables, load data using the read underscore
SQL method and select the SQL select query.
A categorical scatterplot is created using the swarmplot bracket method by the seaborn
package.