Welcome to Introduction to watsonx.ai.
After watching this video, you will be able to explain what watsonx.ai is and who uses
it.
List the components of IBM Cloud Pak for Data.
List common resources in watsonx.ai and IBM Cloud Pak for Data, and build models and manage
services and integrations.
watsonx.ai is a collaborative platform for the data science community and is used by
data analysts, data scientists, generative AI engineers, data engineers, developers,
and data stewards to analyze data and construct models.
With watsonx.ai, you can create projects to organize data connections, assets, and
Jupyter notebooks.
You can upload files to your project and clean and shape the data to refine it for analysis.
In addition, you can create and share data visualizations via dashboards without using
any coding.
IBM Knowledge Catalog provides a secure enterprise catalog management platform to deliver trusted
and meaningful data.
You can build, train, and deploy machine learning models.
You can do prompt engineering and prompt tuning against large language models.
watsonx.ai is available for use in many form factors, which support many different usage
needs.
IBM watsonx.ai is available as a software-as-a-service offering on both IBM Cloud and AWS.
This is the easiest way to get started.
IBM watsonx.ai is available on Cloud Pak for Data, which provides built-in integration
with a number of other data services.
IBM watsonx.ai can be installed on OpenShift, which means it can be deployed on any private
or public cloud with an OpenShift environment.
Cloud Pak for Data is a secure, seamless data access and integration platform that enables
a single view of the data, regardless of the number of data sources you are working with.
It's available as a service on Cloud, and it's also available on private and public
clouds when installed on OpenShift.
You can use watsonx.ai on Cloud Pak for Data, along with other data services.
It includes IBM watsonx.ai, IBM Watson Knowledge Catalog, IBM Watson Machine Learning, and
more.
In IBM watsonx.ai, you can customize the view of different tools that are quickly available
for use within a project.
You can perform tasks for data science, data engineering, data curation, or machine learning
and AI.
You can open recently used projects and documents, and the navigation menu is on the upper left.
In the navigation menu, Projects shows projects and jobs you have created.
In Deployments, you can train, deploy, and manage machine learning models in collaborative
deployment spaces.
Projects Hub shows a collection of datasets, notebooks, industry accelerators, and sample
projects.
To create a project, click the plus sign under the Project section from the watsonx.ai homepage.
The Create a Project window will appear.
First, assign the project a name.
Second, assign an object storage bucket to the project.
Projects require an object storage bucket as it is needed to store project artifacts.
The Overview page keeps you updated with recent assets you created, the resource usage of
the project, and readme for your project description, and a project history.
The Assets tab is where data scientists will be creating and managing their project assets,
such as datasets, models, and pipelines.
The New Asset button lets you use data and tools to create analytical assets, such as
flows, visualizations, experiments, or notebooks.
The Import Asset button lets you import assets.
Use the Context Information and Actions menu from anywhere in the project to view the project
information or load data files as assets.
The RStudio Integrated Development Environment, IDE, is included with IBM Watson Studio so
that you can use R notebooks and scripts in your projects.
Launch RStudio from the Launch IDE menu after you create a project.
A job is a way of running assets, such as data refinery flows or notebooks in a project.
Under the Jobs tab, you can run a job immediately or schedule a job.
You can manage your projects under the Manage tab.
You can control access with user groups, define environments and monitor active runtimes,
see resource usage, and see tools and processing power using services and integrations.
In Services and Integrations, you can associate IBM Cloud Services with your project to add
tools, environments, and capabilities.
You can also use third-party integrations so your project can interact with external
tools.
For example, you can integrate with a Git repository to export the project, work with
documents and notebooks in JupyterLab, or backup the project.
When creating a new asset, there are multiple types of tools available.
Here are the data preparation tools.
There is a Connections tool, where you can make connections to data sources.
You can generate synthetic data using the Synthetic Data Generation tool.
And you can prepare and visualize data using the Data Refinery tool.
These are more than just data preparation tools.
In the Work with Models menu, there are many model-related tools.
Included are Generative AI tools, the Prompt Lab, and Tuning Studio.
And here are some highlights in the Data Science tools.
Decision Optimization is a graphical tool to solve optimization scenarios.
SPSS Modeler can quickly develop predictive models and deploy them into business operations
to improve decision-making.
Studio AI is a wizard-based tool for automatic training of machine learning models.
And Jupyter Notebooks provides a programmatic approach to training machine learning models.
Other tools are available as well.
Here is the final asset type.
Under Automate Model Lifecycles, there is a Pipeline Management tool, which enables
the building of pipelines to automate model lifecycles.
In this video, you learned that.
IBM watsonx.ai is a helpful tool for analyzing and viewing data, cleaning and shaping data,
embedding data into streams, creating, training, and deploying.
Learning watsonx.ai promotes career growth.
Learning watsonx.ai is easy and requires no special skills.
watsonx.ai offers many available resources.